Table Columns API spec (#900)
ni/nimble: packages/nimble-components/src/table/specs/table-columns-hld.md

# Nimble Table Columns API

## Problem Statement

> The `nimble-table` requires users to be able to configure which columns to display for a table. Additionally, a particular display column may require access to multiple fields in the data, and allow a user to either define the field to sort by, or provide a custom sort routine. We need to provide a means for a client to provide their own column visualization. Finally, columns must also provide the user to either specify the header text, or custom visuals to use for the header.

Author: Removed reference to that.

### Out of scope of this HLD

Programmatic API for state that could be considered column-centric: width, sort direction, grouped, etc. These concerns should be covered in separate designs covering those topics specifically, allowing for discussion on both the interactive side and the API design on an individual basis.

## Links To Relevant Work Items and Reference Material

[Table Declarative Columns API prototype:](https://github.com/ni/nimble/blob/325983040e886e52a100664d8fb1129dee767c2f/packages/nimble-components/src/table/tests/table.stories.ts#L23) ([Storybook](https://60e89457a987cf003efc0a5b-twewjutggo.chromatic.com/iframe.html?args=&id=table--table-story&viewMode=story))

## Implementation / Design

> Columns will be provided to the table as slotted elements. The slot for the columns will be the default slot for the table, and thus no slot needs to be expressly provided by the user for a column:

Reviewer: Is your vision that the order of the columns in the document will determine the order in the table? Any complications when we support interactive/programmatic column re-ordering or would we just re-order the columns in the document to achieve that?

Author: At the moment, I think we expect clients to re-order the columns in the document as needed. It's understood that this might make the template code considerably more noisy/complex than it otherwise would be.

Reviewer: Makes sense as a starting point. Let's mention it in the spec.

```
<nimble-table>

>     <nimble-table-column-text valueKey="name"></nimble-table-column-text>

Author: The difference that I see is that the key being referred to here is for a particular value within the table. Additionally, we expect to have some column definitions supply multiple keys, and using something like `data-key1` and `data-key2` doesn't seem like the pattern we want to promote. Instead, I think the pattern is that the individual column APIs provide contextual names. For the "text" column, I'm not sure there's a big difference between "data" and "value", but perhaps `text-key` is better? Not sure I want to propose the right API name for the icon column since we're defining that elsewhere.

    <nimble-table-column-icon valueKey="ready"></nimble-table-column-icon>
    ...
</nimble-table>
```

These columns will _not_ have templates/CSS associated with them, and instead be implementations of an interface that will require returning a FAST ViewTemplate for its visual representation.

The table API to support this could look like the following:

```TS
public Table extends FoundationElement {
    ...

    @observable
    public slottedColumns: ITableColumn[] = [];

>     private slottedColumnsChanged(): void {

Author: Yes, my proposal is that columns always be direct children of the table element. It would be nice to list a good description of the alternative with its pros/cons below. Could you provide that context

        if (this.slottedColumns.length > 0) {
            for (const tableColumn of this.slottedColumns) {

>                 if (this.isTableColumn(tableColumn)) {

Reviewer: Can you clarify what the purpose of `isTableColumn()` is? If the `slottedColumns` are all `ITableColumn` then when would that method return `false`?

Reviewer 2: Maybe this is too much in the implementation details but we can use the filter option on the slotted directive for this: https://www.fast.design/docs/fast-element/using-directives#the-slotted-directive

If we use a concrete TableColumn class then we can do `instanceof` checks.

For an interface we can't rely on `instanceof` but maybe instead we can expose a TableColumn Symbol that columns set as a known property to indicate they fulfill the interface (like [iterators](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Symbol/iterator#user-defined_iterables)). We can enforce in the type that they put a required symbol, [this playground](https://www.typescriptlang.org/play?#code/MYewdgzgLgBAKgQwEYBsCmBhEKCuBbMALhhzAEsBHHNGCATzyWxgF4YBlBplACgEoA3ACgodAA41EqTNnxhWMURJAAzeMnRZcBYULJgoaAE4qEwGgEkpm2QRgBvITGcwjaBABNwKOjADa1jLaYAC6xFBG1MIuru5eYD6KGkFyxIFacsIAvkJCwCgIEBAwAIIA7mgQIHgpdmR4Yug1BsVWyRl2jjFiOKhkwLGe3r5Q7bZEiuJoqurSHfJs6ePRLj19A25DCb4BY8EhChFRQjlAA) shows two ways we could approach that.

Author: Yes, this is perhaps a bit too much implementation detail, but this code was simply meant to reflect the possible need to differentiate between other content that was put in the default slot of the table.

Reviewer 2: > this code was simply meant to reflect the possible need to differentiate between other content that was put in the default slot of the table.

I'd expect any alternate content to be assigned to it's own slot like the action menu. We can do this for validation / filtering user input (and how validation is done is implementation detail) but I wouldn't expect the public api to consist of mixing things besides column configuration elements (ie column config and column group config).

So just to confirm, example looks good as long as default slot is just for column config elements

                    // do init work
                }
            }
        }
    }
}

template:
<template>
    <div>
        ...
    </div>
    <slot ${slotted('slottedColumns')}></slot>
</template>
```

> ### `ITableColumn`

Reviewer 2: So far we have avoided the `I` prefix for interface name. I remember the discussion in some context, maybe it was the JS style guide group, that it isn't really needed. I think it's unnecessary but at least so far for consistency with our other defined interfaces and with FAST defined interfaces I think we would not use the prefix

Author: Removed the 'I' prefix.

This interface is what a column web component (i.e. a slotted column) must implement.

```TS
interface ITableColumn {
    header?: string; // the string to use in the header for the column

>     headerTemplateFn?: () => ViewTemplate; // the template to use for the header (string if none provided)

Author: I've re-worked this to illustrate that header content should be provided through a slot API. Both of the `header<>` APIs have been removed.

>     cellTemplateFn: () => ViewTemplate<ITableCellData>; // the template to use to render the cell content for the column (required)

Reviewer 2: why a headerTemplate function instead of a headerTemplate? The examples shown below for cellTemplateFn don't actually return a function that returns a template.

I'm also curious why not a readonly property instead? I'm hoping and maybe it should be spelled out in the spec that the template itself will only every be made once. The template instance can be re-used and bound many times in many instances but the template should only be created once.

See the note at the end of [composing templates](https://www.fast.design/docs/fast-element/using-directives/#composing-templates):

> When composing templates, extract the composed template to an external variable. If you define the template inline, within your method, property, or expression, then each time that is invoked, a new instance of the template will be created, rather than reusing the template. This will result in an unnecessary performance cost.

So yea I'd consider a property a better API as it emphasizes that we are only going to access a single instance and only one instance should be made (but that template will be re-used and bound in many cells).

    getDataKeys: () => string[]; // the set of keys the table needs to provide the cellTemplateFn with the proper subset of data
}
```

> The `ITableColumn` interface would be updated to support other features not covered in this HLD such as sorting and grouping.

Author: Updated.

### `ITableCellData`

> In order for the `cellTemplateFn` in the above interface to be able to act on the necessary table data, we should have a type that the template function can work with directly through.

Reviewer: nit: "...with directly through" is one extra preposition. Maybe "...can use to access the table's data".

Author: This paragraph has been completely re-worked.

```TS
type tableData = string | number | boolean | Date | null | undefined;

interface ITableCellData {

>     data: { [key: string]: tableData };

Reviewer: Would we expect columns to modify the table data or should we start by marking it read-only? Or is it getting a copy of the data rather than a reference to it?

Author: It gets a copy.

}

/**
 * @internal
 */
class TableCellData<TData extends { [key: string]: tableData }> implements ITableCellData {
    public constructor(public data: TData) { }
}
```

> `TData` here represents a subset of the overall data provided to the table. The `getDataKeys()` method on the `ITableColumn` interface will be used to retrieve the subset of data to provide to a particular `TableCellData` instance.

Author: This whole section has been re-worked.

```TS
public TableColumnText extends FoundationElement implements ITableColumn {
    ...

    @attr
    public valueKey: string;

    public getDataKeys(): string[] {
        return [valueKey];
    }

    public cellTemplateFn(): ViewTemplate<ITableCellData> {
        return html<ITableCellData>`
            <nimble-text-field readonly="true" value=${x => x.data[this.valueKey]}>
            </nimble-text-field>
        `;
    }
}
```

Enabling a particular column to access multiple pieces of data to use in its rendering is equally trivial:

```TS
public TableColumnNumberWithUnit extends FoundationElement implements ITableColumn {
    ...

    @attr
    public valueKey: string;

    @attr
    public unitKey: string;

    public getDataKeys(): string[] {
        return [valueKey, unitKey];
    }

    public cellTemplateFn(): ViewTemplate<ITableCellData> {
        return html<ITableCellData>`
            <nimble-text-field readonly="true" value=${x => this.formatData(x.data[this.valueKey], x.data[this.unitKey])}>
            </nimble-text-field>
        `;
    }

>     public formatData(value: unknown, unit: unknown): string {

Reviewer 3: Oh, I guess this does need to be public in order to be called from the template, right?

>     public formatData(value: unknown, unit: unknown): string {

Author: I believe so...ultimately an implementation detail, but it might help for me to just show this as "internal" in the spec.

>         return `${(value as string)}, ${(unit as string)}`;

Reviewer: nit: I spent 30, seconds debating whether to bother correcting this but couldn't stop myself.
```suggestion
        return `${(value as string)} ${(unit as string)}`;
```

>         return `${(value as string)}, ${(unit as string)}`;

Reviewer: The `as` casts are interesting to think about. In a dream world we could find a way to restrict you to providing data keys that point to data of a specific type (in this case `value` would be a `number` column and `unit` would be `string` column.

I don't have a complete enough picture to know a) whether it would be possible to verify that at compile time and b) whether that would be unnecessarily restrictive for other use cases. Just want to raise it to see if you've thought about it.

Author: This has been addressed in the updated version that uses stricter typing.

    }

    public cellTemplateFn(): ViewTemplate<ITableCellData> {
        return html<ITableCellData>`
            ${when(x => !this.isPositive(x.data[this.valueKey])),
            html`
                <nimble-text-field readonly="true" value=${x => x.data[this.valueKey]} style="fontColor: red;">
                </nimble-text-field>
            `}
            ${when(x => this.isPositive(x.data[this.valueKey])),
            html`
                <nimble-text-field readonly="true" value=${x => x.data[this.valueKey]} style="fontColor: green;">
                </nimble-text-field>
            `}
        `;
    }

    public isPositive(value: unknown): bool {
        return (value as number) >= 0;
    }
}
```

Finally, here is a column that allows a user to register a callback for a click event on a button inside the cell template:

```TS
public TableColumnButton extends FoundationElement implements ITableColumn {
    ...

    @attr
    public idKey: string;

    public getDataKeys(): string[] {
        return [valueKey];
    }

    public callback: (id: string) => void;

    public cellTemplateFn(): ViewTemplate<ITableCellData> {
        return html<ITableCellData>`

>                 <nimble-button readonly="true" @click="${x => this.callback(x.data[this.idKey])}>

Reviewer 2: I don't think this conceptually makes sense. The context of `this` is the configuration custom element that implements `ITableColumn` the configuration custom element should not be hosting any state / methods, etc used by the cell instances. It's just a dumb configuration object.

That should either just be a function call:

```
const callback = () => {};

public TableColumnButton extends FoundationElement implements ITableColumn {
...
    public cellTemplateFn(): ViewTemplate<ITableCellData> {
        return html<ITableCellData>`
                <nimble-button readonly="true" @click="${x => callback(x.data[this.idKey])}>
```

Or imported from a utilities file. Whatever we do it shouldn't be bound to the configuration custom element itself.

Author: Updated to use the event pattern discussed off-line.

                    <span>Do Something</span>
                </nimble-button>
        `;
    }
}

Angular template:

<nimble-table>

>     <nimble-table-column-button #tableButton>Press Me</nimble-table-column-button>

Reviewer 2: The "press me" is for configuring the table header and not data that would go in cells right?

For data that would go in cells we would have to use `<template>blah blah<template>` elements which are insert and cloneable. And would likely want a caching strategy for instancing them.

</nimble-table>

Angular code:

@ViewChild('tableButton', { read: NimbleTableColumnButton, static: true }) private readonly tableButton!: NimbleTableColumnButton;

public ngOnInit(): void {
    tableButton.callback = this.doSomething;
}

private doSomething(id: string): void {
    ...
}

```

Note the missing implementation in the above `ITableColumn` implementations are the necessary pieces to register them as FAST components.

### Initial Nimble-provided Columns

> `TableColumnText`

Reviewer 3: Do you anticipate having another document that covers the details of the `TableColumnText` component? Or, do you see the approval of this spec being sign off on creating that component as well?

If there is no other spec, I wonder what other information needs to be included here. Some things that immediately come to mind are:
- the element name (e.g. `nimble-table-column-text`)
- explicitly defining what it means that "no value is present" to use the placeholder
    - I assume you mean the value associated with `dataKey` is `null` or `undefined`, but it would be good to solidify this.
- is there a way for a client to provide styling (such as italicizing) the placeholder? Is this something we'd want to do or do the designers have a strong feeling on the way placeholders should always be shown?

## Alternative Implementations / Designs

### Programmatic API

A programmatic API was also considered either in place of, or along side the proposed declarative API. Since declaring what columns to show is an aspect of view configuration, it makes sense to accomplish this declaratively when possible. Offering a programmatic API alongside the declarative one, while possible, does introduce complexity in the implementation that would be nice to avoid, at least initially, if possible.

## Open Issues

-   The current design doesn't offer any strict templating feedback for a particular `ITableColumn` implementation. So, if a user provides a dataKey to a property of an `ITableColumn` that wants the value for that dataKey to be a `DateTime` (i.e. its `cellTemplateFn` implementation expects a `DateTime`), but the value in the actual table data for that key is a string, the user will be unaware of that mismatch at compile time.

    It is unclear how we could provide such feedback, but it would be extremely nice if possible.

-   There is some concern with the lifecycle of these custom column components.

> -   Should `ITableCellData` also require a data index? This could enable some scenarios that might otherwise require a user to have id fields in their data.

Reviewer 3: My thought is that we shouldn't be doing anything special with the data index (assuming that is the index of a row within the `data` property on the table). I think for a lot of usages (at least in SLE), that value will be almost meaningless. Instead, I could see the table having a concept of a row ID that is specified with a data key provided to the table. If none is specified, the row index is used. Then, that value of id/index could be passed to the cell data, if we liked that idea.

Author: Removed. If we decide we need such a member to be defined on the `TableCellData` interface we can introduce it then.

The table API to support this could look like the following:

```TS
public Table extends FoundationElement {
    ...

    @observable
    public slottedColumns: ITableColumn[] = [];

    private slottedColumnsChanged(): void {
        if (this.slottedColumns.length > 0) {
            for (const tableColumn of this.slottedColumns) {
                if (this.isTableColumn(tableColumn)) {
                    // do init work
                }
            }
        }
    }
}

template:
<template>
    <div>
        ...
    </div>
    <slot ${slotted('slottedColumns')}></slot>
</template>
```

### `TableCellData` interface

A table cell represents a single column for a single row. The data that a cell has access to will be a subset of the data for the entire row. An instance of a table cell will be generic to describe the subset of data it contains, where `TCellData` is a subset of the data represented by `TableRowData`:

```TS

> interface TableCellData<TCellData extends TableRowData> {

Reviewer 4: Doesn't this mean that `TCellData` must be a subclass of `TableRowData`? Seems like that wouldn't make it a subset of the row data. What am I missing?

Author: Extending generic type parameters just means that `TCellData` must at least match the type definition of `TableRowData`. Ultimately, it will be beneficial to provide links to the `TableRowData` definition. 

So, while the type of `TCellData` is a technical superset of the `TableRowData` type, in practice, the collection of values that `TCellData` represents is a subset of the values that a `TableRowData` instance would be aware of (which would effectively be a collection of `TCellData` values).

  data: TCellData;
}
```

This interface could possibly be expanded in the future to communicate relevant table state to the cell template, such as whether or not the row is selected.

### `ITableColumn` interface

This interface is what a column web component (i.e. a slotted column) must implement.

```TS
interface ITableColumn<TCellData extends TableRowData> {
    // The string to use in the header for the column
    header?: string;

    // The template to use for the header (string if none provided)
    headerTemplateFn?: () => ViewTemplate;

    // The template to use to render the cell content for the column

>     cellTemplate: ViewTemplate<TableCellData<TCellData>>;

Reviewer 4: Why is there a function for the header template, but a direct value for the cell template?

Author: Moved away from the `header` properties to a slot API.

    // The keys that should be present in TCellData.
    // This array is parallel with the keys returned from `getDataKeys()`.
    readonly cellDataKeyNames: readonly string[];

    // The keys from the row data that correlate to the data that will be in TCellData.
    // This array is parallel with the keys specified by `dataKeyNames`.

>     getRowDataKeys: () => string[];

Reviewer 4: Why do we need both `getRowDataKeys` and `cellDataKeyNames`? Aren't they the same?

    // Function that allows the table column to validate the type that gets created
    // for the cell data. This should validate that the types in TCellData are correct
    // for each key defined by `dataKeyNames`.
    // Return `true` if the data is valid. Return `false` if the data is not valid.
    validateCellData(cellData: TableRowData): boolean;
}
```

The `ITableColumn` interface would be updated to support other features not covered in this HLD such as sorting and grouping.

Given the above interface, a series of column providers to handle basic use cases can be written within nimble. For example, the `ITableColumn` implementation we could create for rendering data as a read-only `NimbleTextField` could look like this:

```TS
type TableColumnTextCellData = StringColumnData<'value'>;
public TableColumnText extends FoundationElement implements ITableColumn<TableColumnTextCellData> {
    ...

    public cellDataKeyNames = ['value'] as const;

    @attr

>     public valueKey: string;

Reviewer 4: How is `valueKey` (renamed elsewhere to `data-key`?) an attribute if `cellDataKeyNames` hardcodes the key as "value"?

Author: This is the key a user provides to the column instance in the DOM (as an attribiute) to access the appropriate data out of the table data. The `cellDataKeyNames` are an implementation detail of an ITableColumn (something a user of the column would not be aware of), and are representative of the keyed values that are in the TableCellData passed to its `cellTemplate`.

            `}
            ${when(x => this.isPositive(x.data.value)),
            html`
                <nimble-text-field
                    readonly="true"
                    value=${x => x.data.value}
                    style="fontColor: green;"
                >
                </nimble-text-field>
            `}
        `;

    public isPositive(value: number): bool {
        return value >= 0;
    }

    public validateCellData(cellData: TableRowData): boolean {
        return typeof cellData['value'] === 'number';
    }
}
```

Finally, here is a column that allows a user to register a callback for a click event on a button inside the cell template:

```TS
type TableColumnButtonCellData = StringColumnData<'id'>;
public TableColumnButton extends FoundationElement implements ITableColumn<TableColumnButtonCellData> {
    ...

    public cellDataKeyNames = ['id'] as const;

    @attr
    public idKey: string;

    public getRowDataKeys(): string[] {
        return [valueKey];
    }

    public callback: (id: string) => void;

    public cellTemplate: ViewTemplate<ITableCellData<TableColumnButtonCellData>> =
        html<ITableCellData<TableColumnButtonCellData>>`

>             <nimble-button readonly="true" @click="${x => this.callback(x.data.id)}>

Reviewer 4: `readonly="true"` doesn't mean anything for a button, right?

Author: Copy-pasta.

## Implementation / Design

Columns will be provided to the table as slotted elements. The slot for the columns will be the default slot for the table, and thus no slot needs to be expressly provided by the user for a column:

```HTML
<nimble-table>
    <nimble-table-column-text data-key="name"></nimble-table-column-text>
    <nimble-table-column-icon data-key="ready"></nimble-table-column-icon>
    ...
</nimble-table>
```

These columns will _not_ have templates/CSS associated with them, and instead be implementations of an interface that will require returning a FAST ViewTemplate for its visual representation. The ordering of the columns in the markup will determine the visual ordering of the columns (top to bottom equals left to right...unless in 'rtl'). Re-ordering of columns will be done, at least at first, through the re-ordering of the columns elements in the DOM.

The table API to support this could look like the following:

```TS
public Table<TableRecord> extends FoundationElement {
    ...

    @observable

>     public slottedColumns: TableColumn[] = [];

Reviewer: nit: Why include "slotted" in the name? Is that a naming convention we typically use or could this be simplified to just `columns` or `columnDefinitions`?

Related: if the user sets this property does it automatically update the state of the DOM? Or should this be made `readonly` with the only API to modify it going through DOM APIs like add/removeElement?

If there are FAST patterns I should educate myself about that already explain all this, feel free to let me know.

Author: Sorry this should be marked as `internal`. I was following a pattern put in place in the [`menu-button`](https://github.com/ni/nimble/blob/f3692b7db86a15b4bc0f00151a736a5f9de938df/packages/nimble-components/src/menu-button/index.ts#L58) for its slotted menus. Perhaps there is a good reason to not name it this? Ultimately, I'm not too concerned about it, because, again, this is expected to be an internal API (but you are correct in that it should be marked as `readonly`).

    <div>
        ...
    </div>
    <slot ${slotted('slottedColumns')}></slot>
</template>
```

### `TableCellData` interface

A table cell represents a single column for a single row. The data that a cell has access to will be a subset of the data for the entire row. An instance of a table cell will be generic to describe the subset of data it contains, where the `TCellData` type is a superset of the type represented by [`TableRecord`](https://github.com/ni/nimble/blob/3e4b8d3dd59431d1671e381aa66052db57bc475c/packages/nimble-components/src/table/types.ts#L24):

```TS
interface TableCellState<TCellData extends TableRecord> {
  data: TCellData;
}
```

This interface could possibly be expanded in the future to communicate relevant table state to the cell template, such as whether or not the row is selected.

### `TableColumn<>`

This abstract class is what a column web component (i.e. a slotted column) must extend.

```TS
abstract class TableColumn<TCellData extends TableRowData = unknown> {
    // This method will produce the expected TableCellState that the cellTemplate expects as
    // its source
    generateCellState: (cellData: TCellData) => TableCellState<TCellData>;

>     // The template to use to render the cell content for the column

Reviewer: I think @rajsite mused at some point that we'll want a way to return style information too. Is that missing or did you decide it wasn't needed?

Author: If there is some relevant style information we want to return we can decide that at a later time. For now, I don't see a pressing need to a general API for such things.

Reviewer: Another case to consider is styling for the column header.

Reviewer: As we discussed in the team meeting, there will be an API to provide static styles for a column. Styling for the header can be provided with normal light DOM styling on the table since it's slotted content. It would be good to mention both of these in the spec.

Reviewer: One other corner case to consider documenting: should we describe how a cell's height is computed? Are there any restrictions on what contents can go in a cell (e.g. all cells should have the same height) or things to know about what layout the table will apply to its cells?

Author: I'm not sure we need to get into the details for how a cell's height is computed. Ultimately, this is figured out when considering the heights across all cells in a row (maybe...we could decide that row height is made explicit via some other API, and the cellTemplate of a column has no say in things).

## Problem Statement

The `nimble-table` requires users to be able to configure which columns to display for a table. Additionally, a particular display column may require access to multiple fields in the data, and allow a user to define the field to sort by. We need to provide a means for a client to provide their own column visualization. Finally, columns must also provide the user to either specify the header text, or custom visuals to use for the header.

### Out of scope of this HLD

Programmatic API for state that could be considered column-centric: width, sort direction, grouped, etc. These concerns should be covered in separate designs covering those topics specifically, allowing for discussion on both the interactive side and the API design on an individual basis.

## Links To Relevant Work Items and Reference Material

[Table Spec](./README.md)

[Table Declarative Columns API prototype:](https://github.com/ni/nimble/blob/325983040e886e52a100664d8fb1129dee767c2f/packages/nimble-components/src/table/tests/table.stories.ts#L23) ([Storybook](https://60e89457a987cf003efc0a5b-twewjutggo.chromatic.com/iframe.html?args=&id=table--table-story&viewMode=story))

> ## Implementation / Design

Reviewer: It would be good to explicitly mention some of the decisions around framework integration:
1. columns can be provided only via FAST-based custom elements, not Angular or Blazor elements
2. we expect Nimble will provide most standard column types (text, numeric, link, etc) and we'll include framework-specific integrations (e.g. Angular directives) for them

And I'm curious if anyone has opinions about whether `nimble-components` should re-export relevant FAST types so that someone can build a custom column outside the Nimble monorepo without depending directly on FAST. I'd lean towards yes.

Reviewer 2: > And I'm curious if anyone has opinions about whether nimble-components should re-export relevant FAST types so that someone can build a custom column outside the Nimble monorepo without depending directly on FAST.

My initial reaction is I don't think nimble should be responsible for exposing the api surface for implementing new custom elements. If you want to make a new fast component use the FAST apis, i.e. we didn't create some massive abstraction on top of fast for component dev either, nor do I want to.

Maybe you are suggesting we just expose TableColumn and the types for the `html` helper and the `css` helper? If that's it then maybe we could just make them static on TableColumn

```ts
TableColumn {
    static readonly html = html;
    static readonly css = css;
}
```

But I dunno there are all the other [directives](https://www.fast.design/docs/fast-element/using-directives) commonly used like `repeat`, `when`, etc. yea I dunno if it's worth defining a subset like that.

I lean towards external custom column configuration plugins depending on fast directly. The issue could be if there is misalignment on fast versions used.. If there are issues with that then maybe the right thing to do would be to make fast a peerDependency in nimble (a peer so there is globally one version if it's not possible to have multiple versions in a page). I think fast is designed with the intent that multiple versions can live on a page as long as they don't register with the same name. This case might be an exception though as we need to share implementation-specific objects between systems (ie the output of the `html` and `css` tagged template helpers).

Author: I've added a section below briefly covering framework integration expectations, which covers @jattasNI's first two points. I propose we table the other discussion regarding how we expect clients to deal with the dependencies required for implementing a `TableColumn`. Ultimately that is tangential to the proposed APIs.

Reviewer: @rajsite I had only been thinking about Nimble exporting the FAST types directly on Nimble's interfaces (`ViewTemplate` and `ElementStyles` were as far as I thought through). But that's a great point that we'd also need `html`, `css`, and all the directives you need to construct a template. I agree that's way too much for Nimble to re-export.

I'm happy to defer this discussion indefinitely / until we have a client who wants to write a column outside of this repo.

Columns will be provided to the table as slotted elements. The slot for the columns will be the default slot for the table, and thus no slot needs to be expressly provided by the user for a column:

```HTML
<nimble-table>
    <nimble-table-column-text data-key="name"></nimble-table-column-text>
    <nimble-table-column-icon data-key="ready"></nimble-table-column-icon>
    ...
</nimble-table>
```

> These columns will _not_ have templates/CSS associated with them. Instead, each column element will provide a FAST ViewTemplate for the visual representation of each cell in the column. The ordering of the columns in the markup will determine the visual ordering of the columns (top to bottom equals left to right...unless in 'rtl'). Re-ordering of columns will be done, at least at first, through the re-ordering of the column elements in the DOM.

Author: I've opted to use "column element" where I felt it made sense. "Column configuration element" was a bit wordy for me.

The table API to support this could look like the following:

```TS
public Table<TableRecord> extends FoundationElement {
    ...

    /*
     * @internal
     */
    @observable
    public readonly slottedColumns: TableColumn[] = [];

    private slottedColumnsChanged(): void {
        if (this.slottedColumns.length > 0) {
            for (const tableColumn of this.slottedColumns) {
                if (this.isTableColumn(tableColumn)) {
                    // do init work
                }
            }
        }
    }
}

template:
<template>
    <div>
        ...
    </div>
    <slot ${slotted('slottedColumns')}></slot>
</template>
```

> ### `TableCellData` interface

Reviewer 3: I think this should be
```suggestion
### `TableCellState` interface
```

A table cell represents a single column for a single row. The data that a cell has access to will be a subset of the data for the entire row. An instance of a table cell will be generic to describe the subset of data it contains, where the `TCellData` type is a superset of the type represented by [`TableRecord`](https://github.com/ni/nimble/blob/3e4b8d3dd59431d1671e381aa66052db57bc475c/packages/nimble-components/src/table/types.ts#L24):

```TS
interface TableCellState<TCellData extends TableRecord> {
  data: TCellData;
}
```

> This interface could possibly be expanded in the future to communicate relevant table state to the cell template, such as whether or not the row is selected.

Reviewer: At one point during tech stack research we had talked about whether cells might need to be able to serialize some state when they are about to be scrolled off-screen to be retreived and deserialized before they are scrolled back on-screen. (As a contrived example, this could be something like the scroll position of a text field in a cell.)

Would a client use TableCellState to store this type of information? If so, what's the lifecycle for when the table requests it?

Or is that out of scope for this proposal?

Author: So, I don't think a client even _could_ use the `TableCellState` to store that type of information, in that clients only have access to that type via a custom column implementation, and that object is only for static configuration. Dynamic state that needs to be maintained _could_ be done via the `TableCellState` interface, but it would be updated and accessed solely through the `Table` implementation (i.e. hidden from the client, and thus the state of interest to maintain would be decided by the `Table` itself).

For now, I would propose that the details for how we handle the situation @jattasNI raises are tabled, if we can agree that the current APIs are not prohibitive (which I believe they are not).

Author: Just to update this comment a thread on a new working decision, column element implementations will no longer generate a `TableCellState` instance, and instead only return column configuration state that is needed by the `cellTemplate` implementation. This moves the column element API even further from the concern @jattasNI raises.

### `TableColumn<>`

This abstract class is what a column web component (i.e. a slotted column) must extend.

```TS

> abstract class TableColumn<TCellData extends TableRowData = unknown> {

Reviewer 3: I acknowledge that this is just a spec, but you won't be able to assign `unknown` as the default value here because `unknown` isn't assignable to `TableRowData`. This also needs to be updated to use `TableRecord`.

```suggestion
abstract class TableColumn<TCellData extends TableRecord = TableRecord> {
```

    // This method will produce the expected TableCellState that the cellTemplate expects as
    // its source

>     generateCellState: (cellData: TCellData) => TableCellState<TCellData>;

Reviewer 3: I think this function signature is going to be problematic. There is potentially state in the `TableCellState` object that the column cannot set (such as whether or not the row is selected). Since this code only knows about part of the state, should it return a [partial](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/utility-types.html#partialtype) state?

Author: Updated the API to now have a separate type parameter on the `TableColumn` class that will specify the auxiliary column configuration that the `cellTemplate` implementation for a column element would need. So `generateCellState` has morphed to `getColumnConfig`.

    // The template to use to render the cell content for the column
    abstract cellTemplate: ViewTemplate<TableCellState<TCellData>>;

    // The style to apply to the cellTemplate
    cellStyles?: ElementStyles;

    // The keys that should be present in TCellData.
    // This array is parallel with the keys returned from `getDataKeys()`.
    readonly cellDataKeyNames: readonly string[];

    // The keys from the row data that correlate to the data that will be in TCellData.
    // This array is parallel with the keys specified by `dataKeyNames`.

>     abstract getRowDataKeys(): string[];

Reviewer 2: both this and the above result in keynames right?

```suggestion
    abstract getRowDataKeyNames(): string[];
```

Reviewer 3: That is correct. I think these names should actually be updated with the new terminology, so I think something like this would be more appropriate:
```
// The field names that should be present in the TCellData record.
// This array is parallel with the field names returned from `getRowRecordFieldNames()`.
readonly cellRecordFieldNames: readonly TableFieldName[];

// The names of the fields in the row's record that will be used to populate the TCellData record.
// This array is parallel with the keys specified by `cellRecordFieldNames`.
abstract getRowRecordFieldNames(): TableFieldName[];
```

Reviewer 2: What about cellStateFieldNames and getRecordFieldNames?

Thinking there really isn't a cell record, just cell state which has pieces of a record.

Reviewer 3: That seems reasonable to me. If we want to get really specific, maybe the property should be cellStateDataFieldNames since they aren't fields within the cell state itself but fields within the data in the cell state. I'm undecided on whether or not it's worth making that distinction. One reason it might be worth making the distinction is if we ever think we'll need an API for getting the field names that a column adds to the cell state. I can't think of a reason why we'd need to do that though.

Author: Does this imply that the type parameter should change to `TCellRecord`, and that then the `TableCellState` interface should have a member called `record` and not `data`? My feeling is that this doesn't seem necessary, but I can be convinced otherwise.

Reviewer 3: No, I don't think this implies that the type parameter or member need to be renamed.

Author: Updated.

    // Function that allows the table column to validate the type that gets created
    // for the cell data. This should validate that the types in TCellData are correct
    // for each key defined by `dataKeyNames`.
    // Return `true` if the data is valid. Return `false` if the data is not valid.

>     abstract validateCellData(cellData: TCellData): boolean;

Reviewer 2: I think an exception might make sense here. It shouldn't be an expected code path right (definitely want to avoid on a hot path)? If data is poorly formatted according to the plugin which is implementing this method then we can't render.

If the contract is that this throws an exception then we can get nicer error reporting messages from the plugins. Thoguhts?

Reviewer 3: I don't have a strong opinion either way. I'd be fine if we change this function to have a `void` return type and document it to throw an exception when the data is invalid.

Author: Updated to have this method indicate it should throw in invalid cases.

    @observable

>     readonly slottedHeader: HTMLElement;

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure how to reflect this in the spec, but I think we said that the header might ultimately be slotted into the table rather than the column. I'm not sure we need to figure out the detail of how this would work within this spec, but from my understanding, it might be that `slottedHeader` does not exist on a `TableColumn`.

Author: This has been removed.

}
```

_Note: The `TableColumn` class may be updated to support other features not covered in this HLD such as sorting and grouping._

Given the above class, a series of column providers to handle basic use cases can be written within Nimble. For example, the `TableColumn` implementation we could create for rendering data as a read-only `NimbleTextField` could look like this:

```TS

> type TableColumnTextCellData = StringColumnData<'value'>;

Reviewer 3: new terminology:
```suggestion
type TableColumnTextCellData = StringField<'value'>;
```

// this interface is used to pass auxiliary configuration to access within the cellTemplate
interface TableColumnTextCellState<TCellData extends TableRecord> extends TableCellState<TCellData> {
    placeholder: string;
}

public TableColumnText extends TableColumn<TableColumnTextCellData> {
    ...

>     public generateCellState = (cellData: TextColumnCellData): TableColumnTextCellState<TextColumnCellData> => {

Reviewer 3: Can this be written as

```suggestion
    public generateCellState(cellData: TextColumnCellData): TableColumnTextCellState<TextColumnCellData {
```

Author: Re-worked this API.

    public cellDataKeyNames = ['value'] as const;

    @attr
    public valueKey: string;

    @attr

>     public placeholder: string; // Column auxiliary configuration

Reviewer 2: I think we should observe all these attributes for changes and have a way to notify the parent table that their values have changed (and to re-render) i.e. fire a custom `column-configuration-change` event or something. The table can listen for those events generically and trigger a new render on raf, etc.

For example if the user changes the placeholder text attribute programmatically, the current cells will show the old placeholder value but if the user scrolls new cells will show the new placeholder.

We could do it like the wafer map by manually tracking it (plugins define placeholderChanged, etc and call a base class method which notifies) or we can brute force in the base class and just report on any observable property change: https://www.fast.design/docs/fast-element/observables-and-state/#external-observation

I think I lean towards the later so plugin authors can't accidentally forget to notify for attribute / observable property changes. But regardless of impl, maybe spec should discuss that as a requirement.

Author: Made a comment about how we would expect to handle notifications for things like the `placeholder` property, but made it clear that this spec would not be ironing out the details of that implementation/API.

    @attr
    public placeholder: string; // Column auxiliary configuration

    public getRowDataKeys(): string[] {
        return [valueKey];
    }

    public cellTemplate: ViewTemplate<TableCellState<TableColumnTextCellData>> =
        html<TableCellState<TableColumnTextCellData>>`
            <nimble-text-field readonly="true" value=${x => x.data.value} placeholder=${x => x.placeholder}>
            </nimble-text-field>
        `;

    public validateCellData(cellData: TableRowData): boolean {
        return typeof cellData['value'] === 'string';
    }
}
```

> This also enables columns to access multiple pieces of data to use in its rendering:

Reviewer 3: Using new terminology, I think this should be written as
```suggestion
This also enables columns to access multiple fields from the row's record to use in its rendering:
```

type TableColumnNumberWithUnitCellData = NumberColumnData<'value'> & StringColumnData<'units'>;

> const format = (value: number, unit: string): string => {

Reviewer 2: to match the template fn call

```suggestion
const formatData = (value: number, unit: string): string => {
```

> type TableColumnNumberWithUnitCellData = NumberColumnData<'value'> & StringColumnData<'units'>;

Reviewer 3: new terminology:
```suggestion
type TableColumnNumberWithUnitCellData = NumberField<'value'> & StringField<'units'>;
```

const format = (value: number, unit: string): string => {
    return `${value.toString()} ${units}`;
}

public TableColumnNumberWithUnit extends FoundationElement implements ITableColumn<TableColumnNumberWithUnitCellData> {
    ...

    public cellDataKeyNames = ['value', 'units'] as const;

    @attr
    public valueKey: string;

    @attr
    public unitKey: string;

    public getRowDataKeys(): string[] {
        return [valueKey, unitKey];
    }

    public cellTemplate: ViewTemplate<TableCellState<TableColumnNumberWithUnitCellData>> =
        html<TableCellState<TableColumnNumberWithUnitCellData>>`
            <nimble-text-field
                readonly="true"
                value=${x => formatData(x.data.value, x.data.units)}
            >
            </nimble-text-field>
        `;

    public validateCellData(cellData: TableRowData): boolean {
        return typeof cellData['value'] === 'number' && typeof cellData['units'] === 'string';
    }
}
```

Here we have a column visualized in different ways based on custom logic:

```TS

> type TableColumnPositiveNegativeNumberCellData = NumberColumnData<'value'>;

Reviewer 3: new terminology:
```suggestion
type TableColumnPositiveNegativeNumberCellData = NumberField<'value'>;
```

    return value >= 0;
}

public TableColumnPositiveNegativeNumber extends FoundationElement implements ITableColumn<TableColumnPositiveNegativeNumberCellData> {
    ...

    public cellDataKeyNames = ['value'] as const;

    @attr
    public valueKey: string;

    public getRowDataKeys(): string[] {
        return [valueKey];
    }

    public readonly cellStyles: ElementStyles = 
        css`
            .good {
                color: green;
            }

            .bad {
                color: red;
            }
        `;

    public readonly cellTemplate: ViewTemplate<TableCellState<TableColumnPositiveNegativeNumberCellData>> =
        html<TableCellState<TableColumnPositiveNegativeNumberCellData>`

>             html`

Reviewer 2: nit: can remove this html tag as there is an outer one, left-over from refactor

Author: Done.

                <nimble-text-field

>                     class=${_ => isPositive(x.data.value) ? "good" : "bad"}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                    class="${x => isPositive(x.data.value) ? "good" : "bad"}"
```

                    readonly="true"
                    value=${x => x.data.value}

>                     style="color: red;"

Reviewer 2: nit: don't need the inline style anymore

Author: Done.

>                     value=${x => x.data.value}

Author: Fixed.

                >
                </nimble-text-field>
            `}
        `;

    public validateCellData(cellData: TableRowData): boolean {
        return typeof cellData['value'] === 'number';
    }
}
```

Finally, here is a column that allows a user to register a callback for a click event on a button inside the cell template:

```TS

> type TableColumnButtonCellData = StringColumnData<'id'>;

Reviewer 3: new terminology:

```suggestion
type TableColumnButtonCellData = StringField<'id'>;
```

const fireEvent = (buttonElement: HTMLElement, clickData: { data: string}): void => {
    const event = new CustomEvent('button-click', { detail: data });
    buttonElement.dispatchEvent(event);
}

public TableColumnButton extends FoundationElement implements ITableColumn<TableColumnButtonCellData> {
    ...

    public cellDataKeyNames = ['id'] as const;

    @attr
    public idKey: string;

    public getRowDataKeys(): string[] {
        return [valueKey];
    }

    public callback: (id: string) => void;

    public readonly cellTemplate: ViewTemplate<TableCellState<TableColumnButtonCellData>> =
        html<TableCellState<TableColumnButtonCellData>>`

>             <nimble-button @click="${(x, c) => fireEvent(c.event.currentTarget, {data: x.data.id})}>

Reviewer 2: nit, your example is 100% accurate. We can simplify it a tad by knowing that this specific element (all fast-based elements) expose a [$emit](https://www.fast.design/docs/api/fast-element.fastelement._emit/#fastelementemit-method) method on the base class that does the same thing as the fireEvent function.

Makes the example simpler, but is the exact same concept.

```suggestion
            <nimble-button @click="${(x, c) => c.event.currentTarget.$emit('button-click'), {data: x.data.id})}">
```

>             <nimble-button @click="${(x, c) => fireEvent(c.event.currentTarget, {data: x.data.id})}>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            <nimble-button @click="${(x, c) => fireEvent(c.event.currentTarget, {data: x.data.id})}">
```

Author: Updated.

                <span>Press Me</span>
            </nimble-button>
        `;

    public validateCellData(cellData: TCellData): boolean {
        return typeof cellData['id'] === 'string';
    }
}
```

Angular template:

```HTML
<nimble-table #table>
    <nimble-table-column-button></nimble-table-column-button>
</nimble-table>
```

Angular code:

```TS
@ViewChild('table', { read: NimbleTable, static: true }) private readonly table!: NimbleTable;

public ngOnInit(): void {

>     table.addEventListener('button-click', doSomething)

Reviewer 2: I think you should be able to do normal angular event binding in the template itself. At least that should be our expected goal.

It may be that each plugin that is firing events will have to include a directive to listen for the events and turn them to `@Input`s and get good typing of the event details.

Reviewer 3: I agree with @rajsite's suggestion. I'll nit-pick it a bit to say that I would expect the event to be an `@Output`, not an `@Input`.

Author: Updated the example code to make it use an expecting event binding syntax (no `addEventListener`), and added a note on how the ultimate APIs that would be responsible for getting that working are TBD.

}

private doSomething(CustomEvent e): void {
    ...
}

```

Note the missing implementation in the above `TableColumn` implementations are the necessary pieces to register them as FAST components.

### Header Content

Clients should be allowed to use arbitrary content for the display part of a header. This is accomplished through slotting the desired content in the default slot of a `TableColumn` element. The details of how this is implemented will not be captured here, just the proposed API.

```HTML
<nimble-table>
    <nimble-table-column-text>

>         <nimble-icon-x> // uses icon for column header

Reviewer 2: super duper nit:
```suggestion
        <!-- uses icon for column header -->
        <nimble-icon-x></nimble-icon-x>
```

# Nimble Table Columns API

## Problem Statement

The `nimble-table` requires users to be able to configure which columns to display for a table. Additionally, a particular display column may require access to multiple fields in the data, and allow a user to define the field to sort by. We need to provide a means for a client to provide their own column visualization. Finally, columns must also specify the content to render in its header.

### Out of scope of this HLD

> Programmatic API for state that could be considered column-centric: width, sort direction, grouped, etc. These concerns should be covered in separate designs covering those topics specifically, allowing for discussion on both the interactive side and the API design on an individual basis.

Author: Updated.

    // The keys from the row data that correlate to the data that will be in TCellData.
    // This array is parallel with the keys specified by `cellStateDataFieldNames`.
    abstract getRecordFieldNames(): string[];

    // Function that allows the table column to validate the type that gets created
    // for the cell data. This should validate that the types in TCellData are correct
    // for each key defined by `cellStateDataFieldNames`.
    // This function should throw if validation fails.
    abstract validateCellData(cellData: TCellData): void;
}
```

_Note: The `TableColumn` class may be updated to support other features not covered in this HLD such as sorting and grouping._

Given the above class, a series of column elements to handle basic use cases can be written within Nimble. For example, the `TableColumn` implementation we could create for rendering data as a read-only `NimbleTextField` could look like this:

```TS
type TableColumnTextCellData = StringField<'value'>;
type TableColumnTextColumnConfig = { placeholder: string };

// this interface is used to pass auxiliary configuration to access within the cellTemplate

> interface TableColumnTextCellState<TCellData extends TableRecord, TableColumnTextColumnConfig> extends TableCellState<TCellData, TableColumnTextColumnConfig> { }

Reviewer 3: I don't think this interface is needed anymore, correct?

Author: Correct!

public class TableColumnText extends TableColumn<TableColumnTextCellData, TableColumnTextColumnConfig> {
    ...

    public getColumnConfig(): TableColumnTextColumnConfig {
        return { placeholder: this.placeholder };
    }

    public cellStateDataFieldNames = ['value'] as const;

    @attr
    public valueKey: string;

    @attr
    public placeholder: string; // Column auxiliary configuration

    public getRecordFieldNames(): string[] {
        return [valueKey];
    }

    public readonly cellTemplate: ViewTemplate<TableCellState<TableColumnTextCellData, TableColumnTextColumnConfig>> =
        html<TableCellState<TableColumnTextCellData, TableColumnTextColumnConfig>>`
            <nimble-text-field readonly="true" value="${x => x.data.value}" placeholder="${x => x.columnConfig.placeholder}">
            </nimble-text-field>
        `;

    public validateCellData(cellData: TCellData): void {

>         if(typeof(cellData['value']) !== 'string') {

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
        if (typeof(cellData['value']) !== 'string') {
```

            throw new Error('Type for cellData is incorrect!');
        }
    }
}
```

> In the above example, notifications for when the `placeholder` property changed would be handled by the base class, and it would be responsible for any further action. This aciton could be a combination of things like causing a re-render, and issuing an event that may be publically visibile (such as `column-configuration-changed`). These details will be ironed out outside of this spec.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the above example, notifications for when the `placeholder` property changed would be handled by the base class, and it would be responsible for any further action. This action could be a combination of things like causing a re-render, and issuing an event that may be publicly visible (such as `column-configuration-changed`). These details will be ironed out outside of this spec.
```

Below demonstrates how column elements can access multiple fields from the row's record to use in its rendering:

```TS
type TableColumnNumberWithUnitCellData = NumberField<'value'> & StringField<'units'>;

const formatData = (value: number, unit: string): string => {
    return `${value.toString()} ${units}`;
};

public class TableColumnNumberWithUnit extends TableColumn<TableColumnNumberWithUnitCellData> {
    ...

    public cellStateDataFieldNames = ['value', 'units'] as const;

    @attr
    public valueKey: string;

    @attr
    public unitKey: string;

    public getRecordFieldNames(): string[] {
        return [valueKey, unitKey];
    }

    public readonly cellTemplate: ViewTemplate<TableCellState<TableColumnNumberWithUnitCellData>> =
        html<TableCellState<TableColumnNumberWithUnitCellData>>`
            <nimble-text-field
                readonly="true"
                value="${x => formatData(x.data.value, x.data.units)}"
            >
            </nimble-text-field>
        `;

    public validateCellData(cellData: TCellData): void {

>         if(!(typeof(cellData['value']) === 'number' && typeof typeof(cellData['units']) === 'string')) {

Reviewer 3: nit
```suggestion
        if (!(typeof(cellData['value']) === 'number' && typeof typeof(cellData['units']) === 'string')) {
```

                value="${x => x.data.value}"
            >
            </nimble-text-field>
        `;

    public validateCellData(cellData: TCellData): void {
        if (typeof(cellData['value']) !== 'number') {
            throw new Error('Type for cellData is incorrect!');
        }
    }
}
```

Finally, here is a column element that allows a user to register a callback for a click event on a button inside the cell template:

```TS
type TableColumnButtonCellData = StringField<'id'>;

public class TableColumnButton extends TableColumn<TableColumnButtonCellData> {
    ...

    public cellStateDataFieldNames = ['id'] as const;

    @attr
    public idKey: string;

    public getRecordFieldNames(): string[] {
        return [valueKey];
    }

    public callback: (id: string) => void;

    public readonly cellTemplate: ViewTemplate<TableCellState<TableColumnButtonCellData>> =
        html<TableCellState<TableColumnButtonCellData>>`
            <nimble-button @click="${(x, c) => c.event.currentTarget.$emit('button-click', {data: x.data.id})}">
                <span>Press Me</span>
            </nimble-button>
        `;

    public validateCellData(cellData: TCellData): void {

>         if (typeof(cellData['id']) ~== 'string') {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        if (typeof(cellData['id']) !== 'string') {
```

```TS
type TableColumnTextCellData = StringField<'value'>;

// this interface is used to pass auxiliary configuration to access within the cellTemplate
interface TableColumnTextCellState<TCellData extends TableRecord> extends TableCellState<TCellData> {
    placeholder: string;
}

public class TableColumnText extends TableColumn<TableColumnTextCellData> {
    ...

    public generateCellState(cellData: TextColumnCellData): TableColumnTextCellState<TextColumnCellData> {
        return { data: cellData, placeholder: this.placeholder };
    }

    public cellDataKeyNames = ['value'] as const;

    @attr
    public valueKey: string;

    @attr
    public placeholder: string; // Column auxiliary configuration

    public getRowDataKeyNames(): string[] {
        return [valueKey];
    }

    public readonly cellTemplate: ViewTemplate<TableCellState<TableColumnTextCellData>> =
        html<TableCellState<TableColumnTextCellData>>`
            <nimble-text-field readonly="true" value="${x => x.data.value}" placeholder="${x => x.placeholder}">
            </nimble-text-field>
        `;

    public validateCellData(cellData: TCellData): void {

>         if(cellData['value'] !== 'string') {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        if(typeof cellData['value'] !== 'string') {
```

Author: Fixed.

            throw new Error('Type for cellData is incorrect!');
        }
    }
}
```

This also enables columns to access multiple fields from the row's record to use in its rendering:

```TS
type TableColumnNumberWithUnitCellData = NumberField<'value'> & StringField<'units'>;

const formatData = (value: number, unit: string): string => {
    return `${value.toString()} ${units}`;
}

public TableColumnNumberWithUnit extends FoundationElement implements ITableColumn<TableColumnNumberWithUnitCellData> {
    ...

    public cellDataKeyNames = ['value', 'units'] as const;

    @attr
    public valueKey: string;

    @attr
    public unitKey: string;

    public getRowDataKeyNames(): string[] {
        return [valueKey, unitKey];
    }

    public readonly cellTemplate: ViewTemplate<TableCellState<TableColumnNumberWithUnitCellData>> =
        html<TableCellState<TableColumnNumberWithUnitCellData>>`
            <nimble-text-field
                readonly="true"
                value="${x => formatData(x.data.value, x.data.units)}"
            >
            </nimble-text-field>
        `;

    public validateCellData(cellData: TCellData): void {

>         if(!(cellData['value'] === 'number' && typeof cellData['units'] === 'string')) {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        if(!(typeof cellData['value'] === 'number' && typeof cellData['units'] === 'string')) {
```

Author: Fixed.

        css`
            .good {
                color: green;
            }

            .bad {
                color: red;
            }
        `;

    public readonly cellTemplate: ViewTemplate<TableCellState<TableColumnPositiveNegativeNumberCellData>> =
        html<TableCellState<TableColumnPositiveNegativeNumberCellData>`
            <nimble-text-field
                class="${x => isPositive(x.data.value) ? "good" : "bad"}"
                readonly="true"
                value="${x => x.data.value}"
            >
            </nimble-text-field>
        `;

    public validateCellData(cellData: TCellData): boolean {
        if (cellData['value'] !== 'number') {
            throw new Error('Type for cellData is incorrect!');            
        }
    }
}
```

Finally, here is a column that allows a user to register a callback for a click event on a button inside the cell template:

```TS
type TableColumnButtonCellData = StringField<'id'>;

const fireEvent = (buttonElement: HTMLElement, clickData: { data: string}): void => {
    const event = new CustomEvent('button-click', { detail: data });
    buttonElement.dispatchEvent(event);

> }

Reviewer 2: This can be removed now

Author: Done.

public TableColumnButton extends FoundationElement implements ITableColumn<TableColumnButtonCellData> {
    ...

    public cellDataKeyNames = ['id'] as const;

    @attr
    public idKey: string;

    public getRowDataKeyNames(): string[] {
        return [valueKey];
    }

    public callback: (id: string) => void;

    public readonly cellTemplate: ViewTemplate<TableCellState<TableColumnButtonCellData>> =
        html<TableCellState<TableColumnButtonCellData>>`
            <nimble-button @click="${(x, c) => c.event.currentTarget.$emit('button-click'), {data: x.data.id})}">
                <span>Press Me</span>
            </nimble-button>
        `;

>     public validateCellData(cellData: TCellData): boolean {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    public validateCellData(cellData: TCellData): void {
```

Author: Fixed.

>         if (cellData['id'] ~== 'string') {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        if (typeof cellData['id'] === 'string') {
```

Author: Fixed.
